Deepseek is built different. They just
dropped a new model, Deepseek V4. But
here's the thing. Unlike the top closed
AI labs out there that are spending
billions on data centers with unlimited
compute, DeepSeek is incredibly
constrained. They don't have nearly as
much compute. Heck, they don't even have
the top NVIDIA chips. And their team is
like 40 times smaller than OpenAI.
They're incredibly resource limited. But
yet, they managed to build a model
that's on par with the top closed models
out there. The ridiculous thing is they
even open sourced this and they even
released a paper on how they built it.
Now, I spent the past few days reading
this and the design is absolutely
beautiful and ingenious. But here's the
thing. If you're not technical, all of
this looks like alien language. So, in
this video, I'm going to break down
everything in simple terms so you can
understand how incredibly cracked this
model and the DeepSeek team is. Let's
jump right in. First, let's talk specs.
So, this latest V4 Pro model is massive.
It has 1.6 trillion parameters. If
you're not technical, parameters are
basically the dials and knobs inside the
model's brain that stores everything it
knows. In theory, the more parameters,
the smarter and more capable the model
is. And 1.6 trillion parameters is among
the best models out there. But this
comes with a catch. It's way harder to
build and train a model of that size,
which we'll talk more about in a second.
Now, this new V4 also has a context
length of 1 million tokens. This is
basically the model's short-term memory,
or how much info you can stuff into your
prompt for it to remember all at once. 1
million tokens is roughly 750,000 words,
which is huge. It's like feeding it the
entire Harry Potter series and asking it
about a very specific detail on a page,
and it'll actually remember it. Or for
agents, it means the model can run for
hours on long tasks without losing track
of what it's doing. But again, a 1
million token context window is insanely
hard to actually build correctly. So,
the Deepseek team had to come up with
some ingenious solutions to all of this.
In fact, let's dig deeper into why
having a 1 million token context window
is so hard. You see, modern AI models
don't read text the way we do. Every
time it reads a new word, or what's
technically called a token, it asks,
"How does this word relate to all the
other words before it?" Take a simple
example. The cat didn't cross the street
because it was too tired. When it
processes each word, it looks at all the
words before it to see which ones are
most relevant to the current word. In
fact, this is the attention part first
introduced by the legendary paper
attention is all you need by Google. And
this is the foundation behind all large
language models that we know of today.
In fact, if you're interested in
learning more, definitely see this video
for a full explainer. Now, for a short
sentence like this, it's fine. If you're
at the 10th word, that's just 10
comparisons. No big deal. But if you're
at the 100,000th word, that's 100,000
comparisons. And this is the fundamental
bottleneck of every large language
model. Imagine pushing this to a million
tokens. At that scale, the number of
comparisons becomes astronomical. So
large that even high-end hardware starts
to choke just trying to keep up. And
it's not just the compute that suffers.
To make this all work, the model has to
store intermediate results. Basically, a
running memory of everything it has seen
so far. This is called the key value
cache or KV cache. You can think of it
as like a massive lookup table. For
every past word, it stores information
about what that word meant in context.
Now, at small scales, like for a short
paragraph, this is pretty manageable.
But at a million tokens, it becomes
absurd. You're now storing a ton of data
just to maintain context for a single
conversation. These are like gigabytes
sitting in expensive GPU memory just so
the model doesn't forget what it read
earlier. And if you put these two things
together, the insane compute required
and this exploding memory issue, you hit
a wall. So, how did DeepSk solve this?
Looking at the paper, what's interesting
is that the team didn't just throw more
brute force compute at the problem
because, well, they didn't have a lot of
compute. Instead, they asked a much more
elegant question. What if the model
didn't have to look at everything in the
first place? The key idea behind Deepsee
V4 is deceptively simple. Don't treat
all past information as equally
important because in reality it isn't.
When you're reading a book, you don't
constantly reread every page you've ever
seen. You skim, you summarize, and you
jump back only when something is
relevant. Your brain is selective, and
deepseek tries to do the same thing.
They call this a hybrid attention
architecture. And at its core are two
complimentary strategies called CSA and
HCA. Basically, compress the past and
then ignore most of it. Let's start with
the compression. So in a traditional
model, every token is stored
individually. One word, one entry, no
shortcuts. What DeepS did instead is
group them. So one part of the system is
called compressed sparse attention or
CSA for short. It takes small chunks of
tokens, say four at a time, and merges
their information into a single denser
representation. So instead of
remembering individual tokens, it stores
a compact summary of all four. So right
away you've reduced the sequence length
by a factor of four, which means fewer
comparisons and less memory and
therefore less compute. But that alone
isn't enough. Even after compressing,
you're still left with hundreds of
thousands of these blocks at large
scales. Still too many to process
efficiently. Compression helps, but it
doesn't solve the core problem. The real
breakthrough comes from the next step,
which is sparsity. Once the past is
compressed, the model doesn't treat all
of it equally relevant. Instead, it uses
a fast internal mechanism, kind of like
a built-in search engine, to pick out
only the most useful pieces. They call
this the Lightning indexer for sparse
selection. When the model processes a
new token, it doesn't scan the entire
history. It rapidly scores all those
compressed blocks and selects only a
small subset, the ones that most likely
matter, for the current context.
Everything else is ignored, just skipped
entirely. And this is a subtle but
profound shift. The model isn't trying
to remember everything perfectly. It's
trying to remember the right things at
the right time. And that changes things
completely. Instead of doing massive
computations over the entire past, it
focuses compute only where it actually
matters. And this drastically reduces
the workload without losing meaningful
context. But Deepseek didn't stop there
because sometimes you do want a broad
high-level understanding of everything
that came before even if you don't need
the fine details. That's where the
second system comes in. So this is
called heavily compressed attention or
HCA for short. Here the compression is
far more aggressive. Instead of grouping
four tokens, it groups something like
128 tokens or like an entire paragraph
into a single representation. Now you're
shrinking the sequence length by orders
of magnitude. And at that point,
something interesting happens. The
sequence becomes so short that the model
can afford to look at everything at once
because everything is now small enough
to handle. So you end up with a layered
strategy. One pathway keeps moderately
detailed chunks and selectively
retrieves the most relevant ones.
Another one keeps extremely compressed
summaries of the entire history. And
both are used together interled through
the network. So this is a balance
between precision and efficiency between
remembering everything and remembering
just enough. Instead of asking how do we
process all of this now deepseek flipped
the question to how little can we
process and still understand everything.
But there's an obvious problem with this
approach. If you compress 128 tokens or
an entire paragraph into a single
mathematical representation, you're
throwing information away. There's no
way around that. You're trading detail
for efficiency. But what happens when
you actually need a specific detail
back? What if you ask the model about a
very specific sentence buried half a
million tokens ago? Not the general
idea, but the exact phrasing or a
specific number. If that entire
paragraph had been compressed into a
single block, wouldn't that information
be gone? So, this is the fundamental
problem in every compression system. The
more you shrink something, the more you
risk losing what made it precise. But
the cracked team at Deepseek also solved
this issue. So, their solution wasn't to
avoid compression. It was to balance it.
They introduced a third pathway that
does the opposite. It keeps information
completely uncompressed. So this is
called the sliding window attention.
While the model aggressively compresses
the distant past, the sliding window
continuously tracks the most recent
tokens. Let's say the last 128 words
with full exact fidelity, word for word,
no compression. So now you have three
parallel views of the same document. One
that's highly compressed, capturing the
broad detail of everything that came
before it. one that's moderately
compressed, selectively retrieving
relevant chunks when needed, and one
that's completely uncompressed,
preserving the immediate context in
perfect detail. To understand how these
work together, it helps to think of a
student studying for an exam. You don't
reread the entire textbook every time
you answer a question, right? Instead,
you operate on multiple levels at once.
You keep the last few pages open in
front of you because they're immediately
relevant. That's your sliding window.
You rely on summaries of earlier
chapters to keep the big picture in
mind. So that's the heavily compressed
attention. And when you need something
specific, you look through your
highlighted sections. That's the
Lightning Indexer for sparse retrieval.
What Deepseek does is turn that
intuitive human strategy into a precise
mathematical system. By interle these
three distinct attention strategies
layer by layer through the neural
network. Deepseek v4 manages to capture
the best of all possible worlds. It gets
deep long range retrieval and also broad
understanding and also sharp immediate
focus. It's able to achieve a 1 million
token context window while sidest
stepping the devastating compute cost of
traditional attention. And the
efficiency payoff they document in the
paper is pretty insane. So they
benchmarked this new V4 version against
the previous DeepSseek V3.2 which for
context was already considered one of
the most efficient large language models
in the industry. But even for V4 which
has a huge 1.6 trillion parameters with
a massive 1 million token context
window. Here you can see that DeepS v4
Pro requires 3.7 times lower flops or
you can think of this as compute
compared to the previous DeepSseek
version 3.2. Version 4 runs on roughly
27% of the compute that was required for
the previous version. That's an insane
improvement in efficiency. Here's
another crazy chart. This is the KV
cache. Again, this is like the
short-term memory of the AI model. And
here you can see that Deepseek version 4
Pro is like almost 10 times smaller than
the previous DeepSseek version. It only
requires 10% of the KV cache memory. So
in other words, they reduced the memory
footprint of the model's short-term
memory by 90%. That alone completely
changes the hardware requirements for
deploying these huge models. It makes
them ultra efficient. But here's the
question. Does solving attention
actually solve the whole problem? Not
even close. Because the challenge isn't
just memory, it's also scale. Now,
again, this new V4 Pro has a whopping
1.6 trillion parameters. Again, these
are the dials and knobs that make up the
model's intelligence. And this is
massive. This is like one of the biggest
models in the industry. And all these
parameters means the model is huge with
many, many layers. When you stack dozens
of these layers together at a trillion
parameter scale, the system can become
very unstable. The signals flowing
through the network start to amplify
like crazy. And just as a simple side
effect of all this math, think of it
like a microphone placed too close to a
speaker. You know that high-pitched
screech feedback? That's exactly the
same feedback loop in neural networks,
but instead of sound, it's numbers. the
values explode, the loss function
diverges, and it's really easy to crash
a training run. This is called a signal
explosion. So, how do you stop a
trillion parameter network from
crashing? Well, traditionally,
developers have tried to solve this
using residual connections, which act as
bypass lanes that let the signal skip
certain layers and keep the math stable.
In fact, if you're interested in
learning more about residual
connections, I cover it in a bit more
detail in this video. But these residual
connections are still not enough for you
know a trillion parameters. So more
recently the industry has moved toward
hyperconnections which now expand the
width of these residual streams to give
the signal even more lanes to travel in.
But the deepseek paper explicitly
mentions that when you scale to over a
trillion parameters, even standard
hyperconnections start experiencing
these catastrophic spikes. These
traditional bypass lanes just aren't
enough at that scale. So the engineering
team introduced a novel architecture
called manifold constrained
hyperconnections or MHC for short. In
fact they published a full paper on it
back in January of this year. And this
is where the math in the paper gets
genuinely beautiful. The core idea is to
take these residual connections and
constrain it onto something called a
manifold of doubly stochastic matrices.
Now what on earth does that mean? It
probably sounds like pure alien
language. So, let's break it down. On my
channel, I featured so many different AI
models and tools, it can be very
overwhelming. What if you can use all of
these models all in one platform? And
that brings us to Chat LLM by Abacus AI,
the sponsor of this video. Chat LLM is
an all-in-one platform for you to use
the best AI models out there. You can
seamlessly switch between different
models in your chats. Plus, you can also
use all the top image generators out
there, as well as the top video models
out there, all in one integrated
platform, and they're usually very quick
to add a model to their site once it
comes out. Plus, if you're coding
something, they have a really useful
artifacts feature so that you can
preview your generation side by side.
Plus, they have a deep agent feature
which can do some really complex tasks
all autonomously, like creating
PowerPoints, websites, and research
reports. It's going to supercharge your
productivity. Best of all, you can
access all these AI models and image and
video generators and Deep Agent for only
$10 a month. This is way cheaper than if
you paid for each tool separately.
Definitely check out Chat LLM that comes
with Deep Agent in the description
below. You can think of the residual
connections not as a simple pipe
carrying the signal forward, but as a
distribution grid. In a normal
unconstrained network, as the signal
flows through layer after layer, the
pressure in that grid can accidentally
build up. And when it does, it feeds on
itself and it creates a massive feedback
loop just like a microphone near a
speaker, which causes the signal
explosion. Well, here's the key idea.
Instead of trying to dampen that
explosion after it happens, Deepseek
enforces a hard rule before it can ever
occur. It forces the residuals to behave
like what is called a doubly stochastic
matrix. In other words, every row must
sum up to one and every column must also
sum up to one. In plain terms, that
means the total signal is always
conserved. It will never amplify. The
signal can literally not blow up because
of these constraints because the math
forbids it. But here's the real
challenge. Defining that rule is easy,
but applying it at the trillion
parameter scale is not. So to make it
work they used something called the
Syncorn Knop algorithm. Basically before
each layer processes the signal the
model runs a rapid sequence of row and
column normalizations around 20
iterations until the matrix perfectly
satisfies those constraints. At a first
glance, this sounds terrible. We just
spent all this time optimizing compute.
And now you're saying we need to insert
a 20step loop for every layer in a 1.6
trillion parameter model. that would
require way too much compute and kill
performance. But here's where the genius
engineering of DeepSeek kicks in. They
used very aggressive low-level
optimization. So these are like programs
that control how the GPU actually runs
computations. Really complex stuff like
fused GPU kernels, selective
recomputation, etc. This is really deep
and niche. Basically, think of this as
like custom tweaking the GPU to be even
more optimized. And basically they were
able to shrink the overhead of this
entire process to only 6.7%
of runtime. So yes, there's a cost to
adding a 20step loop to each layer, but
it's only 6.7% more time. A relatively
small price to pay compared to having a
training run crash due to a signal
explosion. So it's a very worthy
insurance policy. This is how they were
able to keep the signal of a trillion
parameter model from exploding. But they
didn't stop there. You see, to train a
massive model, you need an optimizer
function. This is the algorithm that
decides how the model learns from its
mistakes. How should its dials and knobs
be changed if its response is wrong. If
you want to learn more about how a model
is trained, again, see this explainer
video for more details. For now, just
think of this algorithm as deciding how
the model should adjust its dials and
knobs if its response is wrong. Now, for
years, the industry standard has been an
algorithm called Atom W. But Deepseek
also replaced this with a custom
optimizer called Muon. Here's how Muan
works in simple terms. Instead of
applying updates directly, you can think
of Muon as like reshaping them using a
two-phase process. First, aggressively
pushing the system toward convergence
and then carefully stabilizing it. You
can think of this as like tuning a
guitar. First, you make big rough
adjustments to get the strings close to
the right pitch. Then, you switch to
tiny precise tweaks to adjust things
into the perfect pitch. Rough and fast
at first, then switch to subtle precise
adjustments. That combination lets the
model learn faster and also stay stable.
So, at this point, the picture is coming
together. You've got a hybrid attention
system solving the memory problem, a
mathematically constrained architecture
presenting signal explosions, and a
highly optimized algorithm that
accelerates learning. On paper, it's
beautiful. But here's the reality check.
There's a huge gap between elegant
equations and getting thousands of GPUs
in a data center to actually execute
them efficiently. And at the scale of
Deepseek V4 at 1.6 6 trillion
parameters. The biggest bottleneck isn't
even computation anymore. It's
communication. This model is so huge
that it can't just live on one chip or
even one rack. The layers of a model
have to be scattered across different
racks in a data center. Now, while a GPU
or even a rack of GPUs can process stuff
really quickly, the problem now is that
as the model processes data, that data
needs to flow from rack to rack to rack.
If GPUs need to wait for data to be sent
to it, well, every millisecond of
waiting is wasted money. Ideally, you
want nothing in the data center to ever
be idle. Of course, the cracked DeepSeek
team was also aware of this issue. And
here's how they solved it. Instead of
waiting for a massive batch of data to
arrive before kicking off computation,
they basically choreographed the data
transfer. In simple terms, they broke it
down into smaller sequential waves. As
soon as the data required for the first
wave arrives, the GPUs immediately spin
up and start crunching the numbers. And
while those GPUs are working on wave 1,
the data for wave 2 is already actively
traveling over the network cables in the
background. Then wave three and wave 4
and so on. Computation and communication
are perfectly overlapped. So the network
latency essentially disappears. The
network cables stay saturated with data.
The compute cores stay busy crunching
numbers and the whole system runs on one
continuously beautifully optimized
pipeline. But to choreograph something
this complex at the microscopic level of
GPU computing is really hard. You can't
just use standard coding languages. So
the paper mentioned how they used a
specific language called tilang to
develop what are known as fused kernels.
A fused kernel is basically taking
multiple separate math operations and
merging them into one single command so
the GPU doesn't have to keep wasting
time reading and writing intermediate
results back to its main memory. It
saves an enormous amount of time, but
writing fused kernels by hand is
notoriously errorprone and exponentially
harder when you're working with over a
trillion moving parts. The awesome thing
is they've even published a GitHub repo
where they open sourced how exactly they
did this. But basically they used
something called a Z3 SMT solver to 100%
prove that their fused kernel code was
indeed correct. Remember at this scale
even a one in a billion error could
happen constantly and silently corrupt
the model. Instead of hoping the code
works they need to mathematically
guarantee it. And the remarkable thing
is they were able to do this using some
incredibly clever and complex math. All
right, up to now we've already covered a
ton of pieces. If we zoom out, we have
the parallel attention compression. We
have the manifold constrained
hyperconnections. We have the muon
optimizer. We even fine-tune how a data
center should fit and run the model. All
of this is just the architecture design.
Next, we also need to feed it data to
train the model so it actually becomes
intelligent and performant. Well, here
it says, "Deepsek v4 probe was trained
on 33 trillion tokens." It's hard to
imagine how huge this is, but it's
basically like more text than any human
could process in many lifetimes of
reading. If you just throw all this data
at the model, there's a risk of it just
drowning in it. It's like if you give a
complete noob a very advanced textbook
on quantum physics, he'll just get very
overwhelmed and likely fail to learn
anything. So for DeepSeek, they didn't
throw the entire data set at it at once.
Instead, they used a curriculum. At the
start, the model only sees short
sequences around 4,000 tokens, just
enough to learn a local structure like
grammar, syntax, and basic patterns.
Then, as the training stabilizes, they
gradually stretch the context from 16K,
and then after that, they increase it
further to 64K all the way up to the
full 1 million token window. It's like
slowly expanding the working memory of a
brain while it's still learning how to
think. But again, here's where things
get messy. At this scale, with 1.6
trillion parameters and feeding it stuff
with a million tokens, training can
become very unstable. One of the biggest
threats is something called a loss
spike. In simple terms, the math
basically blows up and the whole
training run crashes. The usual industry
fix is not really ideal. you just stop
and roll back to an earlier save and try
again. It's expensive and it doesn't
actually fix anything. Now, Deepseek did
something weird. They introduced
something called anticipatory routing.
It doesn't look at now, but instead it
looks at slightly earlier versions of
now, historical snapshots of the model's
parameters and uses those to make
decisions. And you might be thinking
that sounds counterintuitive, right? Why
deliberately use outdated information
when you're training the system? And
that's because the instability is in the
noise. The sharp chaotic fluctuations
that happen step by step. The real trend
underneath moves slowly. It's like when
you're looking at a stock chart, the
daily movements can be quite chaotic.
But if you look at a moving average,
then you can see the overall trend more
clearly. But using a slightly older
snapshot, the system effectively ignores
the noise and locks onto the underlying
trend. And to make this practical, they
don't even run it constantly. The system
monitors its internal statistics and the
moment it detects early signs of a loss
spike. It activates this anticipatory
routing to stabilize the signal and then
gradually hands control back to realtime
routing once the danger passes. So the
model is like self-stabilizing during
training. And combined with the earlier
constraint systems, they built something
genuinely remarkable. A massive model
that's built by a really small team
that's constrained in resources and
compute. But it's even able to match the
performance of the top models out there.
You can see across all these different
benchmarks for knowledge and reasoning
as well as agentic capabilities, it's
pretty much on par with some of the top
closed models out there, including Opus
4.6 Max and Gemini 3.1 Pro. And if you
look at the win rate between DeepSeek
and Opus 4.6 6 Max. This was Claude's
previous best model. You can see that
DeepS version 4 on average has a higher
win rate than Opus 4.6. It also outco
competes Opus 4.6 across all these
tasks. Here's another crazy achievement.
In the realm of frontier mathematics, we
have this benchmark called the Putnham
2025. This is like famously known as one
of the most difficult undergraduate math
competitions in the world. But get this,
Deepseek V4 achieved a perfect score,
120 out of 120. And remember its 1
million token context window. This is
like its short-term memory or how much
info you can stuff into your prompt at
once for it to remember. When pushed to
the absolute extreme limit of 1 million
tokens, its retrieval accuracy even
beats Google's latest Gemini 3.1 Pro,
which also has a million tokens. And if
you look at this independent leaderboard
from Artificial Analysis, you can see
that Deepseek V4 Pro is like the second
best open- source model out there, just
below Kimik 2.6, and it's edging very
close to the top closed models out there
from Google Anthropic and Open AAI. And
that sums up my deep dive on Deepseek
V4. Just to summarize, here's the
cracked design of this model. This is
incredibly tricky to build because it
has a massive 1.6 six trillion
parameters with a context window of a
million tokens. You've got an interled
attention system solving the memory
problem, a constrained architecture
preventing signal explosions, a highly
optimized algorithm that accelerates
learning, some beautiful low-level code
that makes sure it runs efficiently in a
data center, and some really clever
self-stabilizing training, plus a ton of
other technical details I didn't even
cover, otherwise the video would be way
too long. But in the end, you get a
beast of a model that's on par with the
top closed models out there. And that's
really the theme behind this entire
video. It's not just one breakthrough.
It's dozens of cleverly engineered
solutions all working together that
turns something pretty much impossible
possible. And remember that the Deepseek
team is very constrained in resources.
They don't have a huge data center. They
don't even have the top NVIDIA GPUs.
Their team is way smaller than OpenAI or
Google, yet they were able to optimize
everything so efficiently and still
achieve top tier performance. And the
ridiculous thing is instead of just
keeping it closed and behind a payw
wall, they actually open sourced the
model. So it's out on Hugging Face, you
can download this for free and run it
offline if you have the right hardware.
And they even released this paper
spilling all the info on how it was
designed and how they trained it,
including this infrastructure stuff,
which is like top secret for the closed
AI labs. This is info that they never
share. There are so many gold nuggets in
this paper, it's hard to believe that
they're revealing all of this for free.
What a cracked team. Anyways, that sums
up my explainer on the new Deepseek V4.
I dove way deeper this time with a ton
of technical stuff, so hopefully it was
easy to understand. Let me know in the
comments what you think of this. As
always, I will be on the lookout for the
top AI news and tools to share with you.
So, if you enjoyed this video, remember
to like, share, subscribe, and stay
tuned for more content. Also, there's
just so much happening in the world of
AI every week. I can't possibly cover
everything on my YouTube channel. So, to
really stay uptodate with all that's
going on in AI, be sure to subscribe to
my free weekly newsletter. The link to
that will be in the description below.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you in
the next one.